# encephalization
Monson TA, Weitz AP, Brasil MF. 2023. The evolution of human encephalization. Under review at Nature.

Encephalization is lauded as a defining feature of our genus. Human distinctiveness – global dispersal, complex culture, and aptitude for technological innovation – is most often attributed to our large brain relative to body size. Almost 50 years ago, Pilbeam and Gould5 proposed that humans were simply a ‘peculiar large primate’ with large relative brain size that can be explained by interspecific allometry. Among contemporary debates, their work has largely been forgotten. However, new fossils provide evidence of brain and body size diversification among Plio-Pleistocene hominids that demands revisiting this foundational hypothesis. We collected brain and body size data for 225 extant primate species and 18 fossil hominid taxa (we define hominid as everything more closely related to humans than to chimpanzees). Brain:body size relationships are allometrically scaled in extant primates and hominids. However, the slope of allometric scaling is significantly steeper in hominids. The earliest hominids (Ardipithecus ramidus and Australopithecus anamensis, dated to older than 3.7 million years ago, Ma) have brain:body size relationships that fall on the ancestral allometric trajectory, while Australopithecus afarensis (3.8 to 3 Ma) is transitional between ancestral and derived scaling relationships. In contrast to currently held views that encephalization has increased throughout human evolution, our results demonstrate that derived allometric scaling of brain:body size evolved in hominids around 3 Ma, in the Late Pliocene. All hominids after 3 Ma, including the smallest and most robust taxa, are encephalized relative to extant primates. Human encephalization as a key innovation thus evolved much earlier than currently presumed. We hypothesize that a fundamental biological shift ca. 3 Ma altered the trajectory of hominid encephalization and is directly implicated in the evolution of complex symbolic behavior in our lineage.   

All data and code necessary to replicate our analyses are available through in these files.
